Create recruitment myths and truths blog post (#5116)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/hiring-myths-and-truths.md

---
date: 2022-01-20

> title: Basic myths and truths about hiring that startups keep getting wrong

Reviewer: Possible headlines:

- Lies people believe about startup hiring and how to do it right
- Hiring at Startups: The lies people believe and the stuff that works
- Common myths about startup hiring (and how to do it right)
- What I've learned from 10 years of hiring for startups

Author: How about 'Myths and truths: what I've learned from 10 years of startup hiring' (I thought it would be good to get myths in the title somehow as it seems like a decent hook?). Editor's choice though - I like the last one best.

> date: 2022-01-20
> title: Basic myths and truths about hiring that startups keep getting wrong
> rootPage: /blog
> sidebar: Blog
> showTitle: true
> hideAnchor: true
> author:
>   - charles-cook
> featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-ceo-diary-blog.png
> featuredImageType: full
> category: Startups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-01-24
title: Basic myths and truths about hiring that startups keep getting wrong
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: charles-cook
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-ceo-diary-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Startups
tags:
  - Guides
```

---

> These are some of the myths and truths I've learned about hiring for startups over the past decade. I hope they will help you turn recruitment into a more tolerable and less frustrating experience. 

Reviewer: I like a short intro, but this a little too minimal. Maybe lean into your credentials a bit more? Why should someone trust your opinion about hiring?

## Myth #1: Recruiters are responsible for hiring

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
People who get this wrong fail 100% of the time.

```

> _Managers_ are responsible for hiring:
> 
> - Managers are responsible for the output of their teams. 
> - Output can be increased by hiring more people. 
> - Therefore managers are responsible for hiring. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Managers_ are responsible for hiring. Why? Think about it this way:

- Managers are responsible for the output of their teams. 
- Output can be increased by hiring more people. 
- Therefore managers are responsible for hiring. 
```

Recruiters _are_ responsible for maximizing your chances of success by running a great process, helping get a great job ad in the right places, ensuring no balls get dropped, and partnering with you to increase the size of the applicant pool. 

If you are struggling to hire for a role, first ask yourself 'am I spending 20% of my time recruiting?' If the answer is yes, then go complain to your recruiter.

## Myth #2: Hiring gets easier when other companies are making cuts

> Not really - the best people are always in demand and will have lined up 5 interviews within 24hrs of posting on LinkedIn. Often the 'cuts' that are being made are in non-core product areas, or in more manager-y type roles that are unlikely to be relevant to your early stage startup. 
> 
> Hiring _should_ always be difficult because your bar should keep going up with each hire. Imagine if developing amazing new product features was easy. It would probably mean that you were building uninspiring stuff, or features that are easily replicable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not really.

The best people are always in demand and will have lined up five interviews within 24 hours of posting on LinkedIn. Often the 'cuts' that are being made are in non-core product areas, or in more manager-y type roles that are unlikely to be relevant to your early-stage startup. 

Hiring _should_ always be difficult because your bar should keep going up with each hire. Imagine if developing amazing new product features was easy. It would probably mean that you were building uninspiring stuff, or features that are easily replicable. 
```

## Myth #3: Your choice of applicant tracking system, aka 'ATS', matters

> The most popular tools for startups are similar enough that they won't make a difference between recruiting going well and badly for you. A recruiter blaming your ATS is like an engineer blaming your choice of IDE - it only matters to personal productivity in the very short term. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most popular tools for startups are similar enough that they won't make a difference between recruiting going well and badly for you. A recruiter blaming your ATS is like an engineer blaming your choice of IDE – it only matters to personal productivity in the very short term. 
```

> When you are hiring a recruiter, be very wary if the most important thing to them is to migrate to a new ATS. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't hire a recruiter whose first priority is migrating to a new ATS. 
```

## Myth #4: Looking at pipeline data is only something 'bigger' companies should do

> For startups, looking at pipeline data is _more_ important and leveraged than it is for larger companies - the impact of every minute wasted interviewing and hiring the wrong people is exponentially higher. Look at later stages - offers, final interviews - to see which channels are most effective for you and be brutally honest about what's working. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For startups, looking at pipeline data is _more_ important and leveraged than it is for larger companies. Why? Because the impact of every minute wasted interviewing and hiring the wrong people is exponentially higher. Look at later stages (i.e. offers, final interviews) to see which channels are most effective for you and be brutally honest about what's working. 
```

> For example, we found for a recent SRE role that our conversion from application to interview stage was amazing for sourced candidates. However, 0 out of 6 final stage candidates who were sourced got an offer, which is unusually low - usually our conversion rate at that stage is ~33%. We went inbound-only for that role, and the positive impact was immediate - fewer applicants overall, but a much higher number of relevant and engaged people. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, we found for a recent SRE role that our conversion from application to interview stage was amazing for sourced candidates. However, 0 out of 6 final stage candidates who were sourced got an offer, which is unusually low  – usually our conversion rate at that stage is ~33%. We went inbound-only for that role and the positive impact was immediate. We had fewer applicants overall, but a much higher number of relevant and engaged people. 
```

## Truth #1: The bar for writing good job ads is depressingly low

Follow this devastatingly simple process:

> - Outline the _exact_ process they will follow (meet X person by name, do Y task etc.). Do not make the process up for each candidate. 
> - Write out what they will be working on in specific terms - don't just list generic responsibilities. We find linking to recent GitHub Issues a fantastic way of doing this. 
> - Include a salary range. If you can't afford to pay a good salary, then let expensive people self-select out - it's ok!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Outline the _exact_ process they will follow (meet X person by name, do Y task etc.). Do not make the process up for each candidate.
 
- Write out what they will be working on in specific terms - don't just list generic responsibilities. We find linking to recent GitHub Issues a fantastic way of doing this. 

- Include a salary range. If you can't afford to pay a good salary, then let expensive people self-select out - it's ok!
```

> Congrats - you are now beating 90% of specs out there. Optional extra: add some personality/weirdness. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congrats, you are now beating 90% of specs out there. Optional extra: add some personality/weirdness. 
```

> Don't just let your recruiter write the spec without help - they are not copywriters with expertise in every technical discipline ever. Treat it with more importance and care as marketing material - recruiting is more leveraged than blog posts, and yet people put in half the effort into the ad copy. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recruiters are not copywriters with expertise in every technical detail, so don't force them to write the spec without help. A job spec is an advert for your company, so treat it as such. Recruiting is more leveraged than blog posts, and yet people put in half the effort into the ad copy. 
```

You want people to filter themselves out of the process if the work isn't appealing to them. This will save you time in the long run. 

## Truth #2: getting people to do actual (paid) work for you is 10x more effective than the rest of your interviews combined

> Interviews are imperfect in _so_ many ways, and should be generally be seen as a reasonably effective filtering mechanism. Getting candidates to do a sustained piece of actual work in a semi-realistic context is much better. Pay them for their time, obviously - it's cheaper than recruiter fees. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interviews are imperfect in _so_ many ways, and should be generally be seen as a reasonably effective filtering mechanism. Getting candidates to do a sustained piece of actual work in a semi-realistic context is much better. Pay them for their time, obviously – it's cheaper than recruiter fees. 
```

This also levels the playing field, because a lot of interviews only tell you if this person is good at giving interviews. It's also a great way to sniff out exec-speak BS when you are hiring VP of whatever from fancy massive company - you'll very quickly find out if they can do the work. Don't just make the work 'come up with a strategy' - ask people to actually do the work.

> Interviews still provide useful information - you just shouldn't prioritize them at the decision-making stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interviews still provide useful information, you just shouldn't prioritize them at the decision-making stage.
```

## Truth #3: Most recruitment metrics are vanity metrics

> Number of applications, number of initial phone screens, number of candidates sourced - these are all vanity metrics. It is extremely easy to get 500+ low quality applications for a role - even specialist ones. In marketing, it's the equivalent for optimizing for pageviews and ignoring conversion to paid. Don't do it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Number of applications, number of initial phone screens, number of candidates sourced – these are all vanity metrics. It is extremely easy to get 500+ low quality applications for a role – even specialist ones. In marketing, it's the equivalent for optimizing for pageviews and ignoring conversion to paid. Don't do it. 
```

I once managed to get 900 applications in 48 hours for an ops role at a company with pretty low brand recognition that was only advertising on LinkedIn with minimal budget. That doesn't make me a good recruiter. 

> The number of people at late/final stages of your process, and their conversion rates to offers made are the only numbers that really matter.

Reviewer: In the absence of a conclusion, I like to add a 'further reading' section of recommended reading on the topic. Should include a mix of our own stuff (if relevant) and good reads from other sources.
